# SQL

We've looked at the pandas library, which offered us powerful tools to manipulate tabular data stored in (primarily) CSV files. CSVs work well when analyzing relatively small datasets that don't need to be shared across many users. In research and industry, however, data scientists often need to access enormous bodies of data that cannot be easily stored in a CSV format. Collaborating with others when working with CSVs can also be tricky – a real-world data scientist or economist (or anyone involved in policy analysis) may run into problems when multiple users try to make modifications, or, even worse, security issues with who should and should not have access to the data. 

A **database** is a large, organized collection of data. Databases are administered by **Database Management Systems (DBMS)**, which are software systems that store, manage, and facilitate access to one or more databases. Databases help mitigate many of the issues that come with using CSVs for data storage: they provide reliable storage that can survive system crashes or disk failures, are optimized to compute on data that does not fit into memory, and contain special data structures to improve performance. Using databases rather than CSVs offers further benefits from the standpoint of data management. A DBMS can apply settings that configure how data is organized, block certain data anomalies (for example, enforcing non-negative weights or ages), and determine who is allowed access to the data. It can also ensure safe concurrent operations where multiple users reading and writing to the database will not lead to fatal errors.

As you may have guessed, we can't use our usual `pandas` methods to work with data in a database. Instead, we'll turn to Structured Query Language.

**Structured Query Language**, or **SQL** (commonly pronounced "sequel," though this is the subject of [fierce debate](https://patorjk.com/blog/2012/01/26/pronouncing-sql-s-q-l-or-sequel/)), is a special programming language designed to communicate with databases. You may encounter it in classes like CS 61A or Data C88C. Unlike Python, it is a **declarative programming language** – this means that rather than writing the exact logic needed to complete a task, a piece of SQL code "declares" what the desired final output should be and leaves the program to determine what logic should be implemented. 

It is important to reiterate that SQL is an entirely different language from Python. However, Python *does* have special engines that allow us to run SQL code in a Jupyter notebook. While this is typically not how SQL is used outside of an educational setting, we will be using this workflow to illustrate how SQL queries are constructed using the tools we've already worked with this semester.